docs: Updated compactor docs with details like Scalability, SLIs and Resources; Exposed vertical compaction flag (#3387)
thanos-io/thanos: docs/components/compact.md

## Warning: Only One Singleton has to run against single Object Storage.

Because there is no safe locking mechanism for all object storage provides, currently you need to on your own ensure that only
single Compactor is running against single bucket. Running more can result with [Overlap Issues](../operating/troubleshooting.md#overlaps)
that has to be resolved manually.

Singleton, means also that there should be no local compaction on Prometheus side that could potentially cause both compacted and non compacted blocks
being uploaded by sidecar. This is why uploaded flag is still under a separate `--shipper.upload-compacted` flag that helps to ensure that compacted blocks are uploaded before anything else.
The singleton rule is also why local Prometheus compaction has to be disabled in order to use sidecar with upload option. Use hidden `--shipper.ignore-unequal-block-size` to override this check (on your own risk).

> **NOTE:** In further Thanos version it's possible that both restrictions will be removed with production status of [vertical compaction](#vertical-compactions) which is worked on.

> The only acceptable case of running multiple Compactors against single Bucket is when you want to [scale compaction process](#scalability).

Reviewer: It seems a little odd, that we first write essentially "never run more than one compactor", and then end with "except you want scale". We should either not say this at all here or elaborate further.

## Compaction

The Compactor, among other things, is responsible for compacting multiple blocks into one.

Why even compacting? This is a process, also done in Prometheus to reduce number of blocks and compact index indices. We can compact

> index quite well in most cases, because usually series live longer than duration of the smallest blocks, so 2 hours. It really depe

Reviewer: Looks like there is an incomplete sentence here.

exactly the same timestamps. Otherwise samples are added in sorted by time order.

> **NOTE:** Both Prometheus and Thanos default behaviour is to fail compaction if any overlapping blocks are spotted. (For Thanos, within the same external labels).

#### Vertical Compaction Use Cases

There can be few valid use cases for vertical compaction:

* Races between multiple compactions, for example multiple compactors or between compactor and Prometheus compactions. While this will have extra
computation overhead for Compactor it's safe to enable vertical compaction for this case.
* Backfilling. If you want to add blocks of data to any stream where there is existing data already there for the time range, you will need enabled vertical compaction.
* Offline deduplication of series. It's very common to have the same data replicated into multiple streams. We can distinguish two common series duplications, `one-to-one` and `realistic`:
  * `one-to-one` duplication is when same series (series with the same labels from different blocks) for the same range have **exactly** the same samples: Same values and timestamps.

> This is very common while using [Receivers](../components/receive.md) with replication greater than 1.

Reviewer: Maybe a quick explanation: "Because this will de-duplicate the identically replicated samples produced."

  * `realistic` duplication is when same series data is **logically duplicated**. For example it comes from the same application, but scraped by two different Prometheus-es. Ideally
this requires more complex deduplication algorithms. For example one that is used to [deduplicate on the fly on the Querier](query.md#run-time-deduplication-of-ha-groups). This is common
case when Prometheus HA replicas are used. [Offline deduplication for this is in progress](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/issues/1014).

#### Vertical Compaction Risks

The main risk is the **irreversible** implications of potential configuration errors:

> * If you put block with

Reviewer: ?

them or setting to `0s` means no retention.

**NOTE:** ⚠ ️Retention is applied at the end of compaction loop right after Compation and Downsamping loops. If those are failing, data will be never deleted.

## Downsampling

Downsampling is a process of rewriting series' to reduce overall resolution of the samples without loosing accuracy over longer time ranges.

To learn more see [video from KubeCon 2019](https://youtu.be/qQN0N14HXPM?t=714)

### ⚠ ️Downsampling: Note About Resolution and Retention ⚠️

Resolution is a distance between data points on your graphs. E.g.

* `raw` - the same as scrape interval at the moment of data ingestion
* `5 minutes` - data point is every 5 minutes
* `1 hour` - data point is every 1h

Keep in mind, that the initial goal of downsampling is not saving disk or object storage space. In fact, downsampling doesn't save you __any__ space but instead,
it adds 2 more blocks for each raw block which are only slightly smaller or relatively similar size to raw block. This is done by internal downsampling implementation

> which to be mathematically correct holds various aggregations. This means that downsampling can increase the size of your storage a bit (~3x), if you choose to store all resolutions (recommended and by default).

Reviewer: Are you sure about 3x? That seems higher than I would expect. Do we have measurements for this?

Author: It's technically 2 more "streams" of blocks so it's up to 3x

Reviewer: It’s been a while for me to have looked at this part but I thought we don’t duplicate the index, but just samples in chunks. Or is it one block per resolution?

Author: We duplicate. It's a separate block - not tied to any specific block for now. Definitely to improve (: (issue to be added for it)

By default `thanos compact` will run to completion which makes it possible to execute in a cronjob. Using the arguments `--wait` and `--wait-interval=5m` it's possible to keep it running.

> **Compactor is the only Thanos component which should have write access to object storage**

Reviewer 2: Is this true? What about Sidecar which uploads blocks, Receive that uploads blocks, etc.?

Author: :facepalm: You are right ;p

⚠ This is why those labels on block must be both _unique_ and _persistent_ across different Prometheus instances. ⚠

* By _unique_, we mean that the set of labels in a Prometheus instance must be different from all other sets of labels of
your Prometheus instances, so that the compactor will be able to group blocks by Prometheus instance.
* By _persistent_, we mean that one Prometheus instance must keep the same labels if it restarts, so that the compactor will keep
compacting blocks from an instance even when a Prometheus instance goes down for some time.

Natively Prometheus does not store external labels anywhere. This is why external labels are added only on upload time to the `ThanosMeta` section
of `meta.json` in each block.

> **NOTE:** In default mode the state of two or more blocks having same external labels and overlapping in time is assumed as an unhealthy situation.
Refer to [Overlap Issue Troubleshooting](../operating/troubleshooting.md#overlaps) for more info. This results in compactor [halting](#halting).

#### Warning: Only one Instance has to run against single stream of blocks in single Object Storage.

> :warning: :warning: :warning

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:warning: :warning: :warning:
```

  * `realistic` duplication is when same series data is **logically duplicated**. For example, it comes from the same application, but scraped by two different Prometheus-es. Ideally
this requires more complex deduplication algorithms. For example one that is used to [deduplicate on the fly on the Querier](query.md#run-time-deduplication-of-ha-groups). This is common
case when Prometheus HA replicas are used. [Offline deduplication for this is in progress](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/issues/1014).

#### Vertical Compaction Risks

The main risk is the **irreversible** implications of potential configuration errors:

* If you accidentally upload block with the same external labels but produced by totally different Prometheus for totally different applications, some metrics can overlap 
and potentially can merge together making such series useless.
* If you merge disjoint series in multiple of blocks together, there is currently no easy way to split them back.

#### Enabling Vertical Compaction

NOTE: See [risks](#vertical-compaction-risks) section to understand the implications and experimental nature of this feature.

> You can vertical compaction using hidden flag `--compact.enable-vertical-compaction`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can enable vertical compaction using a hidden flag `--compact.enable-vertical-compaction`
```

```
external_labels: {cluster="eu1", replica="1", receive="true", environment="production"}
external_labels: {cluster="eu1", replica="2", receive="true", environment="production"}
external_labels: {cluster="us1", replica="1", receive="true", environment="production"}
external_labels: {cluster="us1", replica="1", receive="true", environment="staging"}
```

and set `--deduplication.replica-label="replica"`, compactor will assume those as:

```
external_labels: {cluster="eu1", receive="true", environment="production"} (2 streams, resulted in one)
external_labels: {cluster="us1", receive="true", environment="production"}
external_labels: {cluster="us1", receive="true", environment="staging"}
```

On next compaction multiple streams' blocks will be compacted into one.

## Enforcing Retention of Data

By default, there is NO retention set for object storage data. This means that you store data for unlimited time, which is a valid and recommended way of running Thanos.

You can set retention by different resolutions using `--retention.resolution-raw` `--retention.resolution-5m` and `--retention.resolution-1h` flag. Not setting
them or setting to `0s` means no retention.

> **NOTE:** ⚠ ️Retention is applied at the end of compaction loop right after Compation and Downsamping loops. If those are failing, data will be never deleted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** ⚠ ️Retention is applied right after Compaction and Downsampling loops. If those are failing, data will be never deleted.
```

  
    Chunk raw     = 3;
    Chunk count   = 4;
    Chunk sum     = 5;
    Chunk min     = 6;
    Chunk max     = 7;
    Chunk counter = 8;
}
```

This means that for each series we collect various aggregations with given interval: 5m or 1h (depending on resolution)
This allows us to keep precision on large duration queries, without fetching too many samples.

### ⚠ ️Downsampling: Note About Resolution and Retention ⚠️

Resolution is a distance between data points on your graphs. E.g.

* `raw` - the same as scrape interval at the moment of data ingestion
* `5 minutes` - data point is every 5 minutes
* `1 hour` - data point is every 1h

Keep in mind, that the initial goal of downsampling is not saving disk or object storage space. In fact, downsampling doesn't save you __any__ space but instead,
it adds 2 more blocks for each raw block which are only slightly smaller or relatively similar size to raw block. This is done by internal downsampling implementation
which to be mathematically correct holds various aggregations. This means that downsampling can increase the size of your storage a bit (~3x), if you choose to store all resolutions (recommended and by default).

> The goal of downsampling is providing an opportunity to get fast results for range queries of big time intervals like months or years. In other words, if you set `--retention.resolution-raw` less then `--retention.resolution-5m` and `--retention.resolution-1h` - you might run into a problem of not being able to "zoom in" to your historical data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The goal of downsampling is to provide an opportunity to get fast results for range queries of big time intervals like months or years. In other words, if you set `--retention.resolution-raw` less than `--retention.resolution-5m` and `--retention.resolution-1h` - you might run into a problem of not being able to "zoom in" to your historical data.
```

Please note that blocks are only deleted after they completely "fall off" of the specified retention policy. In other words, the "max time" of a block needs to be older than the amount of time you had specified.

## Deleting Aborted Partial Uploads

It can happen that any producer started uploading some block, but never finished and never will. Sidecars will retry in case of failures during upload or process (unless there was no persistent storage),
but very common case is with Compactor. If Compactor process crashes during upload of compacted block, whole compaction starts from scratch and new block ID is created. This means that
partial upload will be never retried.

To handle this case there is `--delete-delay=48h` flag that starts deletion of directories inside object storage without `meta.json` only after given time.

This value has to be smaller than upload duration and [consistency delay](#consistency-delay).

## Halting

> Because of very specific nature of Compactor which is writing to object storage, potentially deleting sensitive data and downloading GBs of data, by default we halt Compator on certain data failures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because of the very specific nature of Compactor which is writing to object storage, potentially deleting sensitive data, and downloading GBs of data, by default we halt Compactor on certain data failures.
```

This means that that Compactor does not crash on halt errors, but instead is kept running and does nothing with metric `thanos_compactor_halted` set to 1.

Reason is that we don't want to retry compaction and all the computations if we know that, for example, there is already overlapped state in the object storage for some reason.

Hidden flag `--no-debug.halt-on-error` controls this behavior. If set, on halt error Compactor exits.

## Resources

### CPU

It's recommended to give `--compact.concurrency` amount of CPU cores.

### Memory

Memory usage depends on block sizes in the object storage and compaction concurrency.

Generally, the maximum memory utilization is exactly the same as for Prometheus for compaction process:

* For each source block considered for compaction:
  * 1/32 of all block's symbols
  * 1/32 of all block's posting offsets
* Single series with all labels and all chunks.

> You need to multiple this to X where X is `--compaction.concurrency` (by default 1).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You need to multiply this with X where X is `--compaction.concurrency` (by default 1).
```

> **NOTE:** Don't check heap memory only. Prometheus and Thanos compaction laverages `mmap` heavily which is outside of `Go` `runtime` stats.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** Don't check heap memory only. Prometheus and Thanos compaction leverages `mmap` heavily which is outside of `Go` `runtime` stats.
```

Refer to process / OS memory used rather. On Linux/MacOS Go will also use as much as available, so utilization will be always near limit.

Generally, for medium-sized bucket limit of 10GB of memory should be enough to keep it working.

### Network

> Overall Compactor is the component that might have the heaviest use of network against object storage, so place is near to bucket zone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Overall Compactor is the component that might have the heaviest use of network against object storage, so place it near the bucket's zone/location.
```

It has to download each block needed for compaction / downsampling and it does that on every compaction / downsampling. It then uploads
computed blocks. It also refreshes the state of bucket often.

### Disk

The compactor needs local disk space to store intermediate data for its processing as well as bucket state cache. Generally,
for medium sized bucket about 100GB should be enough to keep working as the compacted time ranges grow over time. However, this highly depends on
size of the blocks. In worst case scenario compactor has to have space adequate to 2 times 2 weeks (if your maximum compaction level is 2 weeks) worth of smaller blocks to
perform compaction. First, to download all of those source blocks, second to build on disk output of 2 week block composed of those smaller ones.

> You need to multiple this to X where X is `--compaction.concurrency` (by default 1).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You need to multiply this with X where X is `--compaction.concurrency` (by default 1).
```
